# Game Jam

Games are an area that have been heavily influence by developments in AI and ML. In this assignment, write a short paper on a game that you like that has been influenced by the evolution of AI. It should be an old enough game to have been influenced by several types of computer processing systems. A good example is Chess or Go, but also take a look at video games like pong or Pac-Man. Write an essay that discusses the game's past, present, and AI future.

## My Essay on Pac-Man and AI

The game Pac-Man has always been heavily influenced by developments in the field of Artificial Intelligence. When Pac-Man was first released, in 1980 by Namco, it was one of the first video games that used _programmed enemy behaviour_ which resembled and foreshadowed artificial intelligence. Each of the four coloured ghosts had their own movement patterns and algorithms and this created an illusion of intelligence and coordination between the ghosts. For example, one of the ghosts chased Pac-Man directly, another attempted to ambush from behind, the third one changed its movements in accordance with the first two and the last ghost moved unpredictably. This initial design made the game feel dynamic and the ghosts' gameplay seemed intelligent and even humanoid. This was despite the fact that they just used determinationist logic and not actually Artificial Intelligence. 

In the years and decades that followed, Pac-Man became a benchmark case study in Artifical Intelligence because it included a variety of advanced components such as pathfinding, prediction and decision-making under pressure; it also had simple rules but a complex, dynamic environment. Researchers use Pac-Man to test algorithms like reinforcement learning, genetic algorithms and Monte Carlo Tree Search. Microsoft owned AI Firm Maluuba once used 150 AI Agents, each with a specific goal in the game (eg: to avoid a specific ghost, to eat a specific pellet etc) to achieve a perfect score on the game. This "divide and conquer" approach is also applicable to real world complex problems. Pac-Man's maze structure and limited visibility also make it a good model to display how much artificial intelligence learns even from incomplete information sets. Furthermore, researchers also made use of Pac-Man as a tool to implement and visualize multiple standard AI search algorithms such as Depth First Search, Breadth First Search and the A* search algorithm to find optimal paths through the maze.

Modern AI systems have learned to play the game significantly better than human beings by making use of training neural networks that observe the game screen and learn and develop strategies from millions of games. In 2020, NVIDIA and Bandai Namco used a Generative Adversial Network to recreate Pac-Man entirely from scratch without referring to the original source code -- simply by analysing 50,000 episodes of gameplay. This was a strong testament to how advanced machine learning can replicate game logic simply through observation. This research and experiment had implications on the generation of new game level layouts and characters, and the creation of AI simulators to train autonomous machines in real-world scenarios. 

Pac-Man had a massive impact on game design and AI tools overall. The ghosts' behavioural logic laid the basic foundation for AI pathfinding and enemy behaviour in many modern video games. Techniques from Pac-Man's structures evolved into much more advanced systems like the A* pathfinding algorithm, state machines and behaviour trees, all of which are used in contemporary game development. As AI keeps evolving and progressing, Pac-Man remains both a teaching tool as well as an important testing environment for AI innovations. It has and always will have a deep and multifaceted relationship with Artificial Intelligence.
